---
title: Interview with iAdvize
created_at: 2017-05-17
kind: article
author_name: Brian Brazil
---

*Continuing our series of interviews with users of Prometheus, Laurent
COMMARIEU from iAdvize talks about how they replaced their legacy Nagios and
Centreon monitoring with Prometheus.*


## Can you tell us about iAdvize does?

I am Laurent COMMARIEU, a system engineer at iAdvize.  I work within the 60
person R&D department in a team of 5 system engineers. Our job is mainly to
ensure that applications, services and the underlying system are up and
running. We are working with developers to ensure the easiest path for their
code to production, and provide the necessary feedback at every step. Thatâ€™s
where monitoring is important.

iAdvize is a full stack conversational commerce platform.  We provide an easy
way for a brand to centrally interact with their customers, no matter the
communication channel (chat, call, video, Facebook Pages, Facebook Messenger,
Twitter, Instagram, WhatsApp, SMS, etc...). Our customers work in [ecommerce,
banks, travel, fashion, etc. in 40
countries](http://www.iadvize.com/en/customers/). We are an international
company of 200 employees with offices in France, UK, Germany, Spain and Italy.
We raised $16 Million in 2015.

## What was your pre-Prometheus monitoring experience?

I joined iAdvize in February 2016. Previously I worked in companies specialized
in network and application monitoring. We were working with opensource software
like [Nagios](https://www.nagios.org/), [Cacti](http://www.cacti.net/),
[Centreon](https://www.centreon.com/), [Zabbix](http://www.zabbix.com/),
[OpenNMS](https://www.opennms.org/en), etc. and some non-free ones like [HP
NNM](https://saas.hpe.com/en-us/software/network-node-manager-i-network-management-software),
[IBM Netcool
suite](http://www-03.ibm.com/software/products/en/netcool-network-management),
[BMC Patrol](http://www.bmc.com/it-solutions/brands/patrol-proactivenet.html),
etc.

iAdvize used to delegate monitoring to an external provider. They ensured 24/7
monitoring using Nagios and Centreon. This toolset was working fine with the
legacy static architecture (barebone servers, no VMs, no containers). To
complete this monitoring stack, we also use [Pingdom](https://www.pingdom.com/).

With the moving our monolithic application towards a Microservices architecture
(using Docker) and our will to move our current workload to an infrastructure
cloud provider we needed to have more control and flexibility on monitoring. At
the same time, iAdvize recruited 3 people, which grew the infrastructure team
from 2 to 5.  With the old system it took at least a few days or a week to add
some new metrics into Centreon and had a real cost (time and money).


## Why did you decide to look at Prometheus?

We knew Nagios and the like were not a good choice. Prometheus was the rising
star at the time and we decided to PoC it. [Sensu](https://sensuapp.org/) was
also on the list at the beginning but Prometheus seemed more promising for our
use cases.

We needed something able to integrate with Consul, our service discovery
system.  Our micro services already had a /health route; adding a /metrics
endpoint was simple. For about every tool we used, an exporter was available
(MySQL, Memcached, Redis, nginx, FPM, etc.).

On paper it looked good.

![One of iAdvize's Grafana dashboards](/assets/blog/2017-05-17/iadvize-dashboard-1.png)

## How did you transition?

First of all, we had to convince the developers team (40 people) that
Prometheus was the right tool for the job and that they had to add an exporter
to their apps. So we did a little demo on RabbitMQ, we installed a RabbitMQ
exporter and built a simple [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) dashboard to
display usage metrics to developers. A Python script was written to create some
queue and publish/consume messages.

They were quite impressed to see queues and the messages appear in real time.
Before that, developers didn't have access to any monitoring data. Centreon was
restricted by our infrastructure provider. Today, Grafana is available to
everyone at iAdvize, using the Google Auth integration to authenticate. There
are 78 active accounts on it (from dev teams to the CEO).

After we started monitoring existing services with Consul and cAdvisor, we
monitored the actual presence of the containers. They were monitored using
Pingdom checks but it wasn't enough.

We developed a few custom exporters in Go to scrape some business metrics from
our databases (MySQL and Redis).

Soon enough, we were able to replace all the legacy monitoring by Prometheus. 

![One of iAdvize's Grafana dashboards](/assets/blog/2017-05-17/iadvize-dashboard-2.png)

## What improvements have you seen since switching?

Business metrics became very popular and during sales periods everyone is
connected to Grafana to see if we're gonna beat some record.  We monitor the
number of simultaneous conversations, routing errors, agents connected, the
number of visitors loading the iAdvize tag, calls on our API gateway, etc.

We worked for a month to optimize our MySQL servers with analysis based on the
[Newrelic exporter](https://github.com/jfindley/newrelic_exporter) and [Percona
dashboard for grafana] (https://github.com/percona/grafana-dashboards). It was
a real success, allowing us to discover inefficiencies and perform
optimisations that cut database size by 45% and peak latency by 75%.

There are a lot to say. We know if a AMQP queue has no consumer or if it is
Filling abnormally. We know when a container restarts.

The visibility is just awesome.

That was just for the legacy platform.

More and more micro services are going to be deployed in the cloud and
Prometheus is used to monitor them. We are using Consul to register the
services and Prometheus to discover the metrics routes. Everything works like a
charm and we are able to build a Grafana dashboard with a lot of critical
business, application and system metrics.

We are building a scalable architecture to deploy our services with
[Nomad](https://www.nomadproject.io/). Nomad registers healthy services in
Consul and with some tags relabeling we are able to filter those with a tag
name "metrics=true". It offers to us a huge gain in time to deploy the
monitoring. We have nothing to do ^^.

We also use the EC2 service discovery. It's really useful with auto-scaling
groups. We scale and recycle instances and it's already monitored. No more
waiting for our external infrastructure provider to notice what happens in
production.

We use alertmanager to send some alerts by SMS or in to our
[Flowdock](https://www.flowdock.com/).

## What do you think the future holds for iAdvize and Prometheus?


* We are waiting for a simple way to add a long term scalable storage for our
  capacity planning.
* We have a dream that one day, our auto-scaling will be triggered by
  Prometheus alerting. We want to build an autonomous system base on response
  time and business metrics.
* I used to work with [Netuitive](http://www.netuitive.com/), it had a great
  anomaly detection feature with automatic correlation. It would be great to
  have some in Prometheus. 
