---
title: Interview with Datawire
created_at: 2018-03-16
kind: article
author_name: Brian Brazil
---

*Continuing our series of interviews with users of Prometheus, Kevin Burton
from Richard Li talks about how they transitioned to Prometheus.*

## Can you tell us about yourself and what Datawire does?

At Datawire, we make open source tools that help developers code faster on
Kubernetes. Our projects include [Telepresence](https://www.telepresence.io/),
for local development of Kubernetes services;
[Ambassador](https://www.getambassador.io/), a Kubernetes-native API Gateway
built on the [Envoy Proxy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/); and
[Forge](https://forge.sh/), a build/deployment system.

We run a number of mission critical cloud services in Kubernetes in AWS to
support our open source efforts. These services support use cases such as
dynamically provisioning dozens of Kubernetes clusters a day, which are then
used by our automated test infrastructure.

## What was your pre-Prometheus monitoring experience?

We used AWS CloudWatch. This was easy to set up, but we found that as we
adopted a more distributed development model (microservices), we wanted more
flexibility and control. For example, we wanted each team to be able to
customize their monitoring on an as-needed basis, without requiring operational
help. 


## Why did you decide to look at Prometheus?

We had two main requirements. The first was that we wanted every engineer here
to be able to have operational control and visibility into their service(s).
Our development model is highly decentralized by design, and we try to avoid
situations where an engineer needs to wait on a different engineer in order to
get something done. For monitoring, we wanted our engineers to be able to have
a lot of flexibility and control over their metrics infrastructure. Our second
requirement was a strong ecosystem. A strong ecosystem generally means
established (and documented) best practices, continued development, and lots of
people who can help if you get stuck.


Prometheus, and in particular, the [Prometheus
Operator](https://github.com/coreos/prometheus-operator), fit our requirements.
With the Prometheus Operator, each developer can create their own Prometheus
instance as needed, without help from operations (no bottleneck!). We are also
members of the [CNCF](https://www.cncf.io/) with a lot of experience with the
Kubernetes and Envoy communities, so looking at another CNCF community in
Prometheus was a natural fit.


![Datawire's Ambassador dashboards](/assets/blog/2018-03-16/dashboard.png)

## How did you transition?

We knew we wanted to start by integrating Prometheus with our API Gateway. Our
API Gateway uses Envoy for proxying, and Envoy automatically emits metrics
using the statsd protocol. We installed the Prometheus Operator (some detailed
notes [here](https://www.cncf.io/)) and configured it to start collecting stats
from Envoy. We also set up a Grafana dashboard [based on some
work](https://www.cncf.io/) from another Ambassador contributor.


## What improvements have you seen since switching?

Our engineers now have visibility into L7 traffic. We also are able to use
Prometheus to compare latency and throughput for our canary deployments to give
us more confidence that new versions of our services don’t cause performance
regressions.

## What do you think the future holds for Datawire and Prometheus?

Using the Prometheus Operator is still a bit complicated. We need to figure out
operational best practices for our service teams (when do you deploy a
Prometheus?). We’ll then need to educate our engineers on these best practices
and train them on how to configure the Operator to meet their needs. We expect
this will be an area of some experimentation as we figure out what works and
what doesn’t work.
